---
title: GTFS
short: Getting started with the GTFS API
layout: post
category: gettingstarted
date: 2016-08-15 14:00:00 +1200

---

Most of the public transport data available follow the model of Google's Transit Feed Specification (GTFS). A good place to start is [Google Transit Reference](https://developers.google.com/transit/gtfs/reference/) - this will tell you a lot about the domain, for example, routes, trips, or calendars.

In a nutshell:

**Versions**

The transport network is regularly changing: routes are changed, stops are created, removed or relocated, times change, etc. The data "underneath" therefore is versioned. GTFS allows for changes - which is what calendars are for. However, Auckland Transport's internal planning systems are a little more restrictive, which forces us to add version indicators to all identifiers.

It is thus worth noting that you need to be careful with caching. And, like most identifier, don't try to read anything into them. Sure, an ID like ```71302-20160803113210_v43.25``` looks like bus 713, and version 43.25 created on the August 3<sup>rd</sup> - but that might change, so please treat it as a "string thing".

**Agency**

> An Agency is an operator of a public transit network, often a public authority.

For Auckland Transport, these are the different bus, train, and ferry operators, like Sea Link (ferry), Sky Bus (bus to airport), Ritchies (bus), or AT Metro (trains).

**Route**

> GTFS Routes are equivalent to "Lines" in public transportation systems.

A route, in Auckland terms, is, for example, bus 334, "Otahuhu To Britomart Via Mangere Town Centre". Routes can change over time.

**Trip**

> A Trip represents a journey taken by a vehicle through Stops.

By example, a trip is bus 334, "Otahuhu To Britomart Via Mangere Town Centre", leaving "Platform 1a Otahuhu" at 14:00:00, and arriving at "71 Customs St East" at 15:25:00, Monday to Friday.

From a model perspective, the *trip* ties together the *route* (Bus 334, "Otahuhu To Britomart Via Mangere Town Centre"), a series of *stop times* (14:00:00 - Stop 8098; [63 other stops]; 15:25:00 - Stop 7021) - these can then be resolved to the *stops* (8098="Platform 1a Otahuhu"; 7021="71 Customs St East") - and a *calendar* (Monday-Friday).

**Stop Times**

> A StopTime defines when a vehicle arrives at a location, how long it stays there, and when it departs.

